Rick Gerlach, who is the executive assistant to
Mayor McCann of Houston, Texas. Rick is an alumnus
of the Department of Urban and Regional Planning
at Texas A&M and is exercising an important role
with regard to the development and growth of
Houston. And in that regard, I would like to begin
with a rundown of your personal past and how you
came to be in urban planning.
Okay. I was raised in Abilene, Texas and my father
was a Texas Aggie and so naturally I went to Texas
A&M
beginning to study law. and decided that wasn't
exactly what I needed to do. And in taking several
political science courses from Claude Davis, he
put the bug in my ear about perhaps going into
planning rather than law. There were less
planners than lawyers then, and that's basically
sort of the way that that happened. Rick, you
graduated when? I got my master's in 72. OK. And
upon receipt of your master's degree, you came to
Houston. Well, actually, I came to Houston
my last semester of graduate school, because I was
on that urban extension fellowship with the city
department. And which got a lot of jobs, by the way.
I'd strongly suggest that implementing
something like that in the future because it
places your students without much trouble if they
have any snack. At the end of my tenure at In Model
Cities, I was asked to stay as environmental
project planner in In Model City department under
Michael McAnany. OK. Then you were an intern at
that time, more or less. At that time, yes. And then
when you joined the municipal corporation as a
permanent, was it under civil service? Yes, it
was. I think I graduated on a Saturday, and I was at
work Monday on the payroll. What was your salary at
that time? $10,150. And what is it now? About
$41,000. And a car. We can go over that in a hurry.
Moving right along. Right along. Yes, you know how
to make your old props feel bad,
don't you? Come join us. Okay, so then you joined
the Municipal Corporation in which position? I
started out as a... a project planner in the Model
City department. And the interesting thing about
the Model City program, and it sort of switched me
out of planning in the case of a planning director
type, was that you actually planned the project
and you had the money to fund it. Directly from the
feds. Right, right from the feds. And you knew if
your idea was good or bad. You didn't have to wait 40
years to see if this concept was any good. know your
rehab program busted or you fixed the houses you
know it was very very immediate type of planning
and uh that was the phone and i told her to grab these
copies quick and uh that sort of took me out of out of
the traditional city planner type mode of
thinking and into more uh planning and managing it
too. There was a time that I was project manager for
all those projects too. I was administrator and
planner. So it was very very rewarding and
revealing and you got to see whether you were right
or wrong real fast and you had direct interface of
course with the residents that your projects were
were impacting upon because all of us, the
planners and functional areas, had a task force of
neighborhood residents that we had to meet with.
And they actually designed with us, we planned
with them, the types of programs that they wanted.
And so it was very revealing. Did you have much
interface with the housing authority? At that
time, no. We really didn't. At that time, the
housing authority hadn't built any new units in 20
years. And they were, no, we really didn't. Then
from that position, you moved to what? Well, let's
see. I stayed, I moved to a senior project planner
spot, which didn't do anything except pay me more
and give me an assistant. And then that was 1974.
And Mayor-elect Hawthorne was trying to put
together an office of the mayor, or a part of the
office of the mayor that could sort of deal with
overall policy development, which is sort of
funny because I always thought policies are crude
and never developed. But anyway, we were working
at that time with several... people, Bob Schultz,
I think it was with one of the big eight accounting
firms, and Alan Ackman with the assistance group
out of Silver Spring, Maryland, to work on this
proposal. And all of a sudden, HUD comes up with
capacity building demonstration projects. So my
boss at that time, which was Mike McEnany, who was
the manager of planning for all the cities, and
myself and Alan Ackman of the assistance group got
together and we wrote. a proposal, which we got
funded for a quarter of a million dollars to do
capacity building, which was sort of a, as I
understood it, and it may be wrong, but a
forerunner of how cities can deal with community
development programs.
So we set up what was then called the Policy
Planning Division of the Mayor's Office. Among
the things we were trying to do was to develop an
urban policy, if you will, which we managed
finally to do last year to do a capital improvement
program which the city hadn't had ever and
yes it's true now they had a program but it never put
everything together and it never was approved
officially by motion as policy it was never done
1974 was the first the first real capital
improvement program per se. The Public Works
Department has always had a program. And it's a
negotiated program with the council. But as far as
an official document with project numbers and
everything by function and year and funds and
everything like that, it was the most complete
one. It was the first one we'd ever done. At any
rate, we Passed a 1974-75 CIP program, which was
basically the tail end of the bond election. And
then went right to work on a 1976 through 78 capital
improvement program, which was developed a lot
like most cities develop their programs and goals
and objectives and the whole nine yards. It was a
relatively straightforward plan. You said the
whole planning process? Yes. And again, it was
much more sophisticated. The first one was sort of
a kit of parts approach, but the other one I felt
very good about because we really did isolate cost
by objectives and types of projects that went
through such. We've abandoned it now because
nobody paid any attention to it. We had no
mechanism and still don't of accounting for cost
by project because our accounting system isn't up
to sorting across funds at this time. We are doing
that now. So we kind of blew that off this last time.
And that's getting off track, however. Anyway,
and so the policy planning division then changed
names to planning coordination. When was this?
Well, that was with the, when Hawthorne's didn't
run and Mary McCann was elected. In 19... In 19, oh
Lord. 78, I guess. 78. Yeah, our division not only
did the capital improvement program and the
revenue sharing budget, but we also did the
operating budget for 77 and 78. When the mayor came
in, he removed the budget function out of that
office and into his office, into the mayor's
office proper in a management services group.
Yes, that was in 78.
And they removed the three people out of our office
that were doing
it. So that sort of left us with, well, doing about
half revenue sharing budget, and they're doing
the other half. No operating budget,
coordination basically A95, which they still do.
Under a new name, called Planning and Management
Division.
Planning and Management Division basically now,
and that was where I was up until August of this last
year, was set up trying to do operational
planning, which is certainly maybe jargon, but
what it is is we're trying to improve the budget
process to allow for a cost accrual by objective.
if you will, output measures, some way to account
for it. We've set up the accounting system, at
least we're in the process right now of setting up
the accounting system to do that. So we'll have a
traditional line item budget over here, a line
category, and we'll have, however, on the other
side, an operational plan, which basically takes
your money and tells you what you're getting for
it. And aside here, Rick, is that... As part of our
core curriculum at Texas A&M, students are
required to take a course in the principles of
accounting, which coins them with the principles
of how to set up books and keep track of funding, the
revenues, and the expenditures, and so forth. I'm
not sure that personally I agree that this should
be part of the required core curriculum for
graduate planning students. But you may be able to
comment on that from your particular point of
view. No, I think the accounting for the money, as
far as planning, you can hire somebody to do that.
Some course that would teach you how to budget, how
to set up a performance budget, not account for it.
Accounting is past tense. That's not what
planning is about. I would suggest that...
perhaps some of the city management courses might
be if you're going to require something rather
than accounting. I don't see that at all. Well,
it's been a problem to me personally, and I just, as
long as we're touching on that, I don't like that. I
wouldn't have taken that course.
Okay. Okay, then you went from that into the next
phase of your career. Well, I was... We operated in
planning and management. This is really
confusing, changing the names. Can't tell the
players without a program. We operated without a
director. And we criticized the feds. Oh, really?
We operated without a director for almost a year.
It might have been a year and a half. And basically,
what we had were two managers. And I managed the
hardware side of the shop, and a woman managed the
software side, the social service side, for
almost a year. And I was sort of an executive
without portfolio for a long time, basically
operating under what I got by with was because of my
very strong association with the Department of
Public Works in capital improvement program and
revenue sharing. And that's where, to this day, a
lot of my stroke comes from. If I really need help, I
can always feel like I can go to those guys. I've
helped them out on some things. And they've helped
me out on some things. Basically, they don't have a
planning group, per se. And I was sort of their
planner. And so if we had to fight a planning
argument, I'd go up there with the public works
strength behind me and make planning points for
them. And if I had problems internally, they would
take care of me. That's the system everyone
criticizes, but it is in fact in place.
Okay, then from that you went on to... Okay, well
from there, which puts us at August of 1980, there
was a vacancy created on the mayor's office staff.
as an executive assistant position, which is sort
of like a deputy mayor, but nobody wants to admit
it. And the mayor saw fit to ask me if I wanted to do
that. And I said yes, yesterday, and made the move.
Well, when you made that move, you left civil
service behind you. Yes, I did. At that point. Yes,
I did. So now you're serving at the pleasure of the
mayor. Absolutely. And you like that, too. Yes, I
do. It makes you responsive. Yes, it does. It makes
you a little more careful. But what happened was
from a position where I was doing a lot of just staff
research and stuff like that, I've actually
gotten to a point where I'm liaison with the city
planning department, the real estate
department, the purchasing department,
management information systems department. my
old division of the mayor's office, which is
planning and management. Who did I leave out? I
always leave somebody out anyway. But then
there's some functional areas dealing with
energy, environment,
legislation in terms of our analysis between
legal department, the mayor's office, planning
and management. We have a consortium, and I'm the
mayor's liaison with that. and trying to keep up
with boards and commissions.
Oh, yes, and supposedly liaison with the
Metropolitan Transit Authority in their
dealings with the office of the mayor. Sounds like
a bundle to me. Making me old. What do you do in your
spare time? That's another subject. Anyhow...
Now that you're in this position, Rick, I'd like to
ask you some questions about your perception of
the planning process as we in planning envision
it, how it has worked since you have come to
Houston, how it is working currently, and then
later on how you think it may evolve in the
immediate future. Let's begin with your earliest
firsthand knowledge of how the planning process,
if there is a planning process at all in Houston,
how it operates. Clearly, we all know that Houston
doesn't have zoning. But there may be other things
it doesn't have. And there may be things that it
does have to compensate for non-zoning. And we'd
like to know about it. Because in terms of the
history of planning in Texas, Houston is an
anomaly in this sense. And it's the largest single
city in the state. And as such, even if anyone
wanted to, we could not overlook Houston in terms
of its growth, in terms of how it accommodates
growth, and in terms of how it relates to the formal
planning process as we might conceive it in a
textbook. Well, in terms of the non-zoning,
I came out of planning school raving about zoning.
I'm not sure that the absence of zoning
necessarily means there's an absence of planning
or a planning
process. After doing three capital improvement
programs for the city, I would find that there's a
hell of a lot of planning that's going on. We're
basing it on something. I've found in most cities
that the form outweighs the substance in most
planning exercises.
The city of Dallas, for example, it seems to me that
while they manage their resources much better at
least reading wise they do much better than we do
they account for things to the nth degree I'm not
real sure that any more thought goes into to their
physical facilities planning for example which
is what I basically do
the city has grown so quickly and the dynamics of
having a second downtown in three years where
there used to be a residential subdivision, for
example. I'm not convinced that zoning would
prohibit anything that's happened in the city of
Houston. It might have slown it up. It might have
gotten people thrown in jail. But I really don't
think, I honestly don't think that this is any I'm
not going to say better or worse, but any different
from any city that would be totally unconstrained
in any kind of growth. It might have directed the
location of activities to different areas than
has, in fact, occurred. But you're saying that it
would have happened regardless of zoning. I think
so. If you do have some . The thing about zoning,
that I miss, or I think that some of our citizens are
missing, is it's not going to prohibit a Greenway
crossing. It's not going to prohibit a Northwest
crossing. It provides a forum for citizens to
discuss what the hell's going on in their
neighborhood and if they can do anything about it.
We do not have that here. I mean, you can do it
politically. If a guy wants to put a service
station up next to the chairman of Exxon's house,
he's not going to do it. But the little guy, a mom and
pop junkyard comes up next to him, that's what
we're hurting on, I think. And the fact that, and I
think everyone will admit that all our codes of
ordinances are geared to new development. And the
city, being as young as it is, it's just now getting
to the point of redevelopment in these areas. And
we have no
control. in my way of thinking, that we need to
ensure that any redevelopment is done in an
orderly manner. And I think that's the problem
that we've got, not particularly zoning, because
I really don't think, I mean, even most cities have
a transition zone or an office zone or something
like that, and that's what you have in Montrose and
the Heights, and that's happening anywhere. But
you do have those nuisances, if you will, that
zoning might prohibit, but I'm not sure that it's
worth that. And another thing is a citizen just
won't stand for it. We're not sure in the academic
circles how much of this is due to the public press
and in terms of the editorial positions that are
taken by the press in the Houston area and how much
of it seems to be the popular culture of the time and
the trend and the thing to be in favor of or against
or whatever. I find it not all that easy to accept
that the average citizen in Houston would be
necessarily opposed to zoning. However, I think
it's not an important point because zoning, we all
agree as planners, has definite limitations,
particularly planners who have lived and worked
in Europe, where the concept of zoning originated
and where they've gone beyond it now in terms of
what it seems to me that, you know, this is not my
interview, it's yours, but I just wanted to throw
out that I think that zoning in the United States
has really become almost an aberration and has
expanded into what I would refer to as homogenized
districts of single functions throughout a
metropolitan area wide urbanized district and
it's not right because it leads to incredible
inconveniences and they've got over this in
Europe and now they think in terms of
three-dimensional zoning where you have
multi-purpose buildings and we're getting into
this now in some of the core areas where you have
uses stratified by whether they're below ground
at the sidewalk level and then on up into various
elevations above street level, which seems
incredibly practical and attractive. So the idea
of zoning, I think we can let's go into growth
management then in terms of the planning process
for Houston. Does Houston attempt to compensate
for the lack of zoning in any way? And if so, how does
How does this operate, and is it legal? I'm not a
lawyer. I've told the people on the fourth floor I
won't practice law. But you came from political
science. Oh, yes. So, opinions, you know,
everybody's got one. The city does have an option,
which some believe is unconstitutional, about
enforcing private deed restrictions. Uh, and
that's... Alec Bixley believes it's
unconstitutional. Well, I do too, but I'm not a
judge, so I don't matter. But anyway... Has there
ever been a court test? No, not up the line. Why not?
I think they just go in and let them do it. Just let
them break the deed, especially. Or they put so
much pressure on them, politically and other
ways. You know, I'm not that familiar with that
situation, but I do know that... The deed
restriction argument is fine as long as your
subdivision has the goddamn restrictions. Well,
most of our growth took place in the 50s, so we're
running out of those deed restrictions. They last
for how long? Well, generally, 20 years. It
depends on the deal. We don't have any say in what
goes into these restrictions, by the way. We can
enforce them by a little special deal in the
legislature, which, again, has not really been
tested. I'm not sure anybody would. And it already
applies to Houston, doesn't it? Yes, it does. It's
a bracket that's one-five bill.
Large cities on a 20-mile-long stream named after
a four-footed, very almost extinct quadruped.
But now we're finding that as more of these
restrictions lapse, some of the more affluent
citizens of our city are confronted with the idea
of stop and go's, you know, modeling studios in
their neighborhoods. And they don't like the work
of God damn. And it was okay if people in Montrose
had to deal with it, or people in Third Ward. But now
it's moving down into Tanglewood and people are
getting uppity. You know, and we've got... It's
coming home to roost. Yeah. We've got people in the
medical center area that want a very restrictive
parking ordinance. on some kinds of commercial
property, a la San Francisco. Well, you can't say
some kinds of commercial property are going to
have to provide off-street parking. That's
zoning. You can't do that. And we've told them it's
illegal. They want to do it anyway. And the thing
about that is, in their rush to do that, what they do
is eliminate all the shops and stuff in some of
these neighborhoods that really make the
neighborhood. And what you'll do is a guy will buy
the house next to him, family evict, build a
parking lot. You've screwed up the economics of
the whole goddamn neighborhood. But there are
things that are happening in a city that are moving
toward growth management or zoning type
remedies, such as the sign ordinance that was
recently passed. And there are some people on
council that want more government intervention
into the land use decisions. which is ultimately,
I think, as we discussed, probably the solution to
our transportation woes rather than building
trains and freeways. It's basically some
language decisions about where people do live and
where they do work, and then you build those
bridges with the transportation network, not
build a network that serves everybody in the damn
world. Well, Houston is a city in trouble. I
wouldn't say that. Well, okay. We're a city in
trouble with a AAA bond writing out. Just let me
remind you of that. Well, not everything can be
equated to the dollar sign.
Okay. What money isn't, it can buy, but that's
okay. Everyone has his price. That's right. So
I've been told. Are you suggesting that I've just
found mine?
No, would I do that? You would. How dare you?
Anyway, aside from the frivolity, Houston grew up
at the wrong time, as it were. All the eastern
seaboard cities had their mass transit
facilities in place because they grew up before
the advent of the automobile, and even the cities
on the West Coast did the same, such as Los Angeles,
of all creatures, with the red car system that
operated beautifully up to and through the Second
World War, at which time it was bought out by the
automobile manufacturers in Detroit for clear
reasons, and the rights-of-way no longer
operative. But anyway, what I'm saying is, now you
mentioned energy as being one of your concerns.
And you mentioned the growth of Houston. And you
mentioned all the industries coming in. And the
mayor is very proud of the fact that Houston's
economy is probably one of the brightest, if not
the brightest spots for capital in the entire
United States. How do you relate all these
together, Rick? in terms of continuing to provide
basic accessibility to various sites for various
activities throughout the greater Houston area,
given an energy crunch in the future, given a
growing industrial base for Houston, given,
therefore, the multiplier effect on the entire
retailing economy and business economy,
wholesaling, distribution activities, and all
the rest, and what the consequences are for
residential activity and continued growth. In
terms of growth management, otherwise called
planners by those of us who still identify
ourselves as planners, how would you like to
respond to, I guess this is a question, I was hoping
it was going to be rhetorical. No, not at all. Oh,
Lord. Would you like to handle that? Yeah, I'll
give it a shot. I think that we're finding in
Houston just recently a bit of an implosion, if you
will, or at least some...